Israel is weighing up its response to
Iran after it fired hundreds of missiles
and drones at the country over the
weekend as world leaders call for
restraint Israel's war cabinet met
without announcing any definite course
of action but said it would respond at a
time and in a manner of its choosing
Iran says its assault was an act of
self-defense after several of its
generals were killed earlier this month
in an attack on its diplomatic compound
in Syria
a crater left by Iran's aerial attack
Israel's military says this Desert Air
Base sustained only minor
damage Iran launched more than 300
drones and missiles Israel and its
allies shot down nearly all of them
despite Decades of intense enmity this
was Iran's First Direct attack on
Israel while War leaders call for calm
and restrained Israel's president says
options are
open this is like a real war um I mean
this is a declaration of war not not
because we are restrained and because we
know the repercussions and because we
have deliberations with our partners we
are considering all options and I'm
quite confident that we will take the
necessary steps that are necessary to
protect and defend our people we are not
war Seekers I think I would leave it at
that the US says it will support
Israel's defense but it will not take
part in any military retaliation against
Iran it's going to be up to the Israelis
to decide uh what what the next step is
here I would just say this President
Biden since the beginning of this
conflict has worked very hard to keep
this from becoming a broader Regional
War Israel's war cabinet met without
announcing any decision as the world
waits to see what comes
next let's go over to Jerusalem for our
DW correspondent Tanya ker the Israeli
War cabinet agreed upon retaliation not
about scale or timing what else can you
tell
us well I mean usually these decisions
in this smaller War cabinet are not
publicized but you can imagine this is
also of course on everybody mind here uh
in the country how Israel will retaliate
to this massive strike that came for the
first time directly uh from uh Iran now
from what is discussed here in the
cabinet uh in the farri cabinet is some
of the voices are of course louder we
heard from some far-right cabinet
members there should be a strike that is
will be remembered for generations to
come uh others are more um measured so
some say they could be uh you know a
strike that's being used against Iran's
nuclear facilities that has been of
course uh um between the two countries
for for many years uh a sticking point
but also others say there might be a
measured response because Israel needs
uh the uh international support uh for
such a strike and uh as we just heard
this is not uh really given but in any
case uh Iran has said uh they see this
uh as a rep
strike uh what they did on Saturday
night um for the attack on the Iranian
compat in Damascus they see this as
completed but they have also said uh
that uh basically if Israel will strike
back there will be an e an even harsher
strike back on Israel what would Israel
gain from a
response I think it's all about
deterrence and Israel had said even
before uh this reprisal strike by Iran
uh that they will strike back in
particular uh if this uh strike would
come directly uh from Iran and not just
through its proxies uh such as Hezbollah
from Southern Lebanon or from the
houthis in Yemen or uh militias uh in
Iraq and of course I mean for a few
years now um you know there has been
this a shadow war between uh Israel and
Iran over its nuclear Iran's nuclear
activities but this is now uh out in the
open and that is seen here also uh as a
new uh equation now um as I said the
Iranians said at least on a diplomatic
level that they see this as completed
but there's a lot of pressure here also
domestically for Israel to respond to
that as far as international support
goes though uh the US has said uh it
wouldn't help uh Israel in hitting back
well I mean we've been hearing uh from
especially from the United States uh
that were very much involved as they
said after you know uh shooting down all
these uh these massive amount of drones
and and missiles that were directed and
launched at Israel uh Saturday night uh
that they don't want to see uh a wider
conflict they actually urged uh uh the
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu in a phone call with US
President Joe Biden early on Sunday
morning here local time that they should
see this as a success that most of the
uh um missiles and drones were actually
uh shot down there was a real active
defense Shield they don't want to see
this are developing into a wider
regional conflict they also have of
course especially the United States they
have assets here in the region they have
their own interest but also the other
countries here in the region they want
to see they don't want to see see this
becoming a wider regional conflict Tanya
thank you very much for bringing us the
latest from
Jerusalem at a United Nations emergency
meeting called to discuss Iran's attack
on Israel both Israel and Iran accused
the other of being the main threat to
peace in the Middle East they accused
fellow UN members of ignoring the threat
that the other posed to its security un
Chief Antonio gues called for restraint
[Music]
a verbal Showdown following a night of
drone and missile attacks ambassadors
from Iran and Israel faced off at the
United
Nations gues for his briefing Iran's
Envoy Justified the assault as
retaliation for a strike on its
Consulate in Syria which it blames on
Israel faced with such circumstances the
Islamic Republic of Iran had no choice
but to exercise its inherent right to
self-defense under international law
Israel called on the UN to impose all
possible sanctions on
Iran this attack crossed every red line
and Israel reserves the legal right to
retaliate the Middle East is on the
brink the people of the region are
confronting a real danger of a
devastating fullscale conflict
now is the time to diffuse and
deescalate now is the time for maximum
restraint the UN Chief is not alone in
urging restraint Jordan was in the
flight path of the wave of Iranian
missiles and drones and downed some of
them King Abdullah told us President Joe
Biden that any further action by Israel
would widen the conflict in the region
the US and allies including the UK and
France also helped Israel fend off
Iran's attack at a G7 video meeting the
focus was on condemning Iran and
containing the
conflict Iran's actions risk provoking
an uncontrollable Regional escalation
and this has to be
avoided we will continue to work to
stabilize the
situation we call on Iran and its
proxies to see
completely the
attacks all parties should exercise
maximum restraints We Stand by the
security of Israel and The Wider region
which is of course important for our
security here at home too what we now
need is for calm heads to Prevail Israel
says it has not lost sight of its
objectives in Gaza that imperative and
pressure from its allies May yet be
enough to persuade its leaders to hold
back
Mike Martin is a war studies senior
fellow at King's College London Israel
says this is not over in terms of a
military response what are its
options uh so I mean we can look at
history here and see what the Israelis
have done in recent history so they've
got a very potent uh cyber offensive
capability and we've seen that used a
couple of times particularly against the
Israeli the Iranian nuclear program and
then of course as we saw with the attack
on the consulate the Israeli Air Force
is able to strike targets deep with
inside other countries so Israel has got
a number of military options that it
could choose to use what sort of targets
otherwise besides
consulates uh could Israel be
considering so at at the moment we're in
a situation where both Iran and America
have said that they consider the matter
closed they don't think that there
should be any further strikes Israel
should you know draw a line under that
um and so Israel if it's sensible will
try to keep its response well within
what the Americans would consider uh
part of their foreign policy so I would
expect that any potential Israeli
strikes would be confined to Iran
nuclear program and the reason for that
is because that's well within American
foreign policy so even though the
Americans have said they don't support
any further strikes it is hard for them
to really go overboard and criticize
Israel providing it keeps its response
limited to the nuclear program and also
a limited response because Israel would
have to go It
Alone absolutely and as we saw in the
attacks on Saturday night uh a large
part of the work of Defending Israel was
actually done by the US Air Force in
Jordanian airspace and it's not just you
know we saw something extraordinary on
Saturday which was the jordanians the
Saudi Arabians and other Arab allies
supporting Israel against Iran and
Israel risks fracturing not just its
relationship with America but perhaps
more importantly its relationships with
some of its Arab neighbors and so there
is a a limited degree to which it could
strike targets say within Iran it's much
more likely to go uh if it can against
some of those proxy targets but Mike
bring this into perspective for our
viewers given the minimal destruction
caused by the attack was Iran trying to
cause real
damage I don't think so no I I think uh
it was a massed Air Attack it was
designed um to uh demonstrate Iranian
capab ability and none of the things
that we saw whether it was the drones or
the cruise missiles were particularly
new technologies um in addition Iran
signaled several days in advance that it
was going to respond and and that there
would be an attack coming both to the
Americans through the Turks and also
directly to Israel and I I think if Iran
had wanted to be successful we can look
at some of the other attacks that it's
conducted against say facilities in
Saudi Arabia
and they were successful and so I I
think that Iran was very clearly trying
to make the point that it could respond
it did respond but as it said now
immediately releasing a statement
afterwards saying we now consider that
the matter is closed so Mike are there
winners or losers after this
weekend I I don't if I may I don't think
that's the right way to look at this um
this is a 203 year um confrontation and
it's akin to a game of chess um on
Saturday Israel responded uh sorry Iran
responded it demonstrated its intent it
also gathered a lot of
intelligence um on American and Israeli
capabilities but equally it now risks an
Israeli response which which you know
could be very damaging for Iran because
as we've seen from the media World
opinion tends to Rally around Israel
it's totally shifted The Narrative from
what was happening in Gaza um to now
being about Israel being under attack so
really it's very hard to say at this
point and you know we won't be able to
know uh for several weeks or months
exactly how this is going to play out
for years Israeli officials have argued
the way to contain Iran was by brute
force does that need a rethink
um I I think what's changed is there was
before October 7th the these terrible
attacks by Hamas there was more of a
conversation within Israel about exactly
how to respond there was obviously the
nuclear deal and you know Netanyahu has
always been very Hardline in arguing
that they need to use military strikes
but there have been other voices and I
think what's changed since October the
7th is those other voices are much
quieter
and within the Israeli leadership and in
the Israeli cabinet you know the
far-right members of the Israeli War
cabinet there is a much stronger uh more
united voice arguing that actually war
is the only way to deal with this but it
as with all wars they're unpredictable
and when you start them you don't know
how they're going to finish and so
whilst they may be pushing and arguing
for war and I think that is what the
Israeli leadership is doing at the
moment you can see the reports of the
Israeli cabinet discussions um I would
urge caution because you never know how
Wars are going to finish once you start
them military expert Mike Martin thank
you very much for chiming in great to
have you on the show
again thank
you let's talk about that with
journalist Kristen helber and an expert
on the Middle East Christen great to see
you again uh tell me first of all uh
more about Benny gun a member of the war
cabinet uh he has said that Israel will
exact a price from Iran in a way and
time that suits Israel what does that
mean for you I think they themselves
still don't know you have the radical
cabinet members that we just heard there
asking for a fierce response at the same
time you have the whole International
Community asking Israel for restraint so
what could be possible is that Israel
does more of the same that they have
been done for the last few years which
is attacking revolutionary guards uh
commanders Hamas commanders even outside
Israel it could be maybe limited attacks
on nuclear facilities within Iran not
threatening the sheer existence of the
Irani regime because this would take us
to another level but this is all not
sure for now they are discussing it and
that's a good sign they are considering
what to do um and what do you think
about the position of prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu right now considering
the international pressure the domestic
pressure as well actually prime minister
nany would have three reasons or motives
to widen this war because first of all
he wants to reassure the support of the
International Community which has worked
out already he wanted the US to get back
by the side of Israel and this has
worked out at the same time there have
been long uh term plans within this
radical right-wing government to blow or
to to deal a major blow to its enemies
in the region hisbah and the Iranian
regime so they could consider this the
best moment to do so because now having
the solidarity of the International
Community to go for this major blow and
to escalate the war and the third motive
obviously is to distract from its own
failure in Gaza where he could not
deliver and he could not reach the two
AIMS in this war even after more than
six uh months which means to finish off
with Hamas on a military level and to uh
get the hostages back so it's a failure
and he's distracting by escalating with
Iran this could be his uh idea uh so
limited uh retaliation so many political
motives here at play but uh what about
the risks is there a real risk right now
of things getting out of control I think
the risk is very much if Israel decides
to strike a blow that Iran would
consider to be existential because Iran
has made it very clear that we have an
equation now and that whatever Israel
does to Iran Iran will answer and Iran
has also made clear let clear that it is
ready to move from the role of a string
puller or a mastermind behind attacks
using its proxies in the region to uh
become a direct participant in the war
this has been shown with this attack on
Saturday so this is a dangerous Gamble
and I think Netanyahu would be wiser to
go also for a diplomatic response and to
listen very carefully to what his us
partner is telling him and it's the
first uh direct attack from Iran on
Israel it's something most people were
expecting many countries had warned of I
mean people there were Travel warnings
out and uh it was pretty much clear that
this was going to happen but not in what
scale um tell me more about what's going
on in Iran right now as far as this
response is concerned Iran had to reate
for the April 1 attack and Ayatollah ham
the religious leader of Iran had made it
very clear that he considers this attack
on The Diplomatic compound in Damascus
an attack on territory on Iranian
territory so it's very logical to react
in the sense that you know to have this
massive response in the sense that this
is the first time that from Iranian soil
these missiles and drones were uh
launched and at the same time not only
launch slow flying drones but at the
same time missiles to show their own
force and um at the same time to have a
limited reaction by its allies hisbah
from Lebanon the houthis from Yemen they
were taking part but on a limited SC so
this is just to show everything that is
possible from an Iranian perspective
without really going for a full
escalation because the whole message is
here that we have a massive response but
it's under control we didn't want to you
know cause major harm they didn't do
this to show that they are not
interested in a full-blown war with
Israel or the us but is Iran in control
of its
proxies well it's not that easy it's not
that every attack that hisb launches is
uh you know that it's being coordinated
in Taran but there is a very strong
coordination and hisbah is the life
insurance of the Iranian regime so in
case there is full out War being
launched on a further escalation from
the Israeli side this will be the
response to have hisbah answer with
their 150,000 rockets that could fly
over Israel and this would uh put Israel
in a very dire and very difficult
situation to answer even with its high
technology um um yes uh that we have
just seen at place are there some
positives in all of this are there
positives as as far as the war in Gaza
goes well there are voices in Israel
that are saying that this would be a
chance for Israel to build on that
security support that they have just
gained to go back and talk to its allies
to take Serious what these allies have
been saying and I would argue that any
deescalation in this uh war between
Israel and Iran starts in Gaza you know
it has to start with the ceasefire in
Gaza it has to start with the release of
hostages and this is what president
President Biden tries to tell netan to
say let's declare Victory with Iran and
go back and solve the problem with the
Palestinians because what what the West
should not do is fall for this Narrative
of the Israeli government that had it
has been displaced for years saying that
you know forget about the Palestinians
we are in control of the Palestinian
meds isra Iran is the major threat troop
please just help us to F of Iran this is
short sided because it all comes in one
big package and so the escalation starts
in Gaza what else do we need then from
the International Community very clear
words at the moment everyone treading
carefully what do the next steps need to
be though I think the G7 has made it
clear uh that there need to be some
diplomatic responses there need to be a
strong and harsh condemnation towards
Iran this has been shown I mean Israel
was uh had received all the support and
Iran seems to be internationally
isolated the EU considers to designate
the Iranian revolutionary guards as a
terrorist organization which the US has
already done so in 2019 which would be
one step um to you know further pressure
the Iranian regime but at the same time
it should keep the Diplomatic channels
open it should talk to the regime the
regime in tan is not interested in a
direct confrontation we should take the
serious and we should go back and really
look for a way out in Gaza get the
hostages out ceas fire and improve the
humanitarian situation for the people in
Gaza that have been neglected for at
least two days now nobody's talking
about their situation and their hunger
their hunger Christen h back thank you
very much for giving us the bigger
picture and bringing in all those
strands in a very complicated story